[avro] Add documentation for the Avro format. (#2452)
feldera/feldera: docs/formats/avro.md

# Avro Format

:::note
This page describes configuration options specific to the Avro data format.
See [top-level connector documentation](/docs/connectors/) for general information
about configuring input and output connectors.
:::

Feldera supports sending and receiving data in the Avro format. While Avro-encoded messages are commonly
transmitted over Kafka, any other supported [transport](/docs/connectors/) can be used.

> Avro is a strongly-typed format that requires a shared **schema** between the sender and receiver for successfu

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Avro is a strongly-typed format that requires a shared **schema** between the sender and receiver for successful
```

data encoding and decoding.

Feldera supports the streaming variant of the Avro format, where message schemas are managed
out-of-band by a **schema registry** service.  Instead of carrying the entire schema, Kafka messages
include only schema identifiers:

* **Sender**: Before sending the first message with a new schema, the sender registers the schema
  in the schema registry.
* **Receiver**: Upon receiving a message, the receiver retrieves the associated schema from the
  registry based on the schema identifier before decoding the message.

We support several Avro-based formats:

* **Raw** - every message contains a single Avro-encoded record that represents a row in a SQL
  table or view. This format does not carry any additional metadata that can be used to distinguish
  inserts and deletes.  It is therefore only suitable for representing inserts and upserts, but not
  deletions.

* **Debezium** (input only) - used to synchronize a Feldera table with an external database using
  [Debezium](https://debezium.io/).

* **Confluent JDBC** (output only) - used to send incremental changes computed by Feldera

>   to an external database using [Confluent JDBC connector](https://docs.confluent.io/kafka-connectors/jdbc/current/sink-connector/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to an external database using the [Confluent JDBC connector](https://docs.confluent.io/kafka-connectors/jdbc/current/sink-connector/)
```

about configuring input and output connectors.
:::

Feldera supports sending and receiving data in the Avro format. While Avro-encoded messages are commonly
transmitted over Kafka, any other supported [transport](/docs/connectors/) can be used.
Avro is a strongly-typed format that requires a shared **schema** between the sender and receiver for successfu
data encoding and decoding.

Feldera supports the streaming variant of the Avro format, where message schemas are managed
out-of-band by a **schema registry** service.  Instead of carrying the entire schema, Kafka messages
include only schema identifiers:

* **Sender**: Before sending the first message with a new schema, the sender registers the schema
  in the schema registry.
* **Receiver**: Upon receiving a message, the receiver retrieves the associated schema from the
  registry based on the schema identifier before decoding the message.

We support several Avro-based formats:

* **Raw** - every message contains a single Avro-encoded record that represents a row in a SQL
  table or view. This format does not carry any additional metadata that can be used to distinguish

>   inserts and deletes.  It is therefore only suitable for representing inserts and upserts, but not

Reviewer: add link to where we explain how upserts work in feldera (if we have one?)

schema ID mid-stream. For instance, Debezium updates the schema whenever there is a change in the
connected database schema. This process is known as **schema evolution**.

Feldera supports schema evolution, provided that all schemas in the input stream are compatible
with the SQL table declaration to which the stream is connected, as described below.

### Schema compatibility

The Avro schema consists of metadata specific to the format (e.g., raw or Debezium) and
a table record schema.  The record schema must match the schema of the SQL table that the
connector is attached to:

* The Avro schema must be of type `record`.

* For every non-nullable column in the table, a field with the same name and a compatible type must be present in the Avro schema
  Note that the Avro schema is allowed to contain fields that don't exist in the SQL table.  Such fields are ignored by the parser.
  Conversely, the SQL table can contain **nullable** columns that are not present in the schema.  Such columns will
  be set to `NULL` during deserialization.

A SQL column and a field in the Avro schema are compatible if:

> * If the Avro field is nullable, then the SQL column must be nullable too (however, a non-nullable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Avro field is nullable, then the SQL column must be nullable too (however, a non-nullable
```

  field can be deserialized into eother nullable or non-nullable column).

> * SQL column type and Acro field type must match according to the following table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The SQL column type and Acro field type must match according to the following table.
```

| `CHAR`, `VARCHAR`             | `string`       |                                                                     |
| `BINARY`, `VARBINARY`         | `bytes`        |                                                                     |
| `DATE`                        | `int`          |                                                                     |
| `TIME`                        | `long` or `int`| logical type must be set to `time-millis` or `time-micros`          |
| `TIMESTAMP`                   | `long`         | logical type must be set to `timestamp-millis` or `timestamp-micros`|
| `ARRAY`                       | `array`        | Avro and SQL array element schemas must match                       |
| `MAP`                         | `map`          | SQL map keys must be of type `CHAR` or `VARCHAR`; Avro and SQL value schemas must match|
| user-defined types            | `record`       | Avro record schema must match SQL user-defined type definition according to the same schema compatibility rules as for SQL tables|

### Configuration

The following properties can be used to configure the Avro parser. All of these properties are optional.  However,

> exactly one of `registry_urls` and `schema` properties must be specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
either `registry_urls` or `schema` properties must be specified.
```

| `registry_urls`               | array of strings|`[]`| List of schema registry URLs. When non-empty, the connector retrieves Avro message schemas from the registry.|
| `registry_proxy`              | string          | | Proxy that will be used to access the schema registry. Requires `registry_urls` to be set.|
| `registry_timeout_secs`       | string          | | Timeout in seconds used to connect to the registry. Requires `registry_urls` to be set.|
| `registry_username`           | string          | | Username used to authenticate with the registry.Requires `registry_urls` to be set. This option is mutually exclusive with token-based authentication (see `registry_authorization_token`).|
| `registry_password`           | string          | | Password used to authenticate with the registry. Requires `registry_urls` to be set.|
| `registry_authorization_token`| string          | | Token used to authenticate with the registry. Requires `registry_urls` to be set. This option is mutually exclusive with password-based authentication (see `registry_username` and `registry_password`).|

### Examples

> **Example 1**: Configure Avro parser to receive raw Avro records without embedded schema ids using a static user-provided schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Configure the Avro parser to receive raw Avro records without embedded schema ids, using a static user-provided schema.
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE my_table (
    id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
    ts TIMESTAMP
) with (
  'connectors' = '[{
    "transport": {
      "name": "kafka_input",
      "config": {
        "bootstrap.servers": "localhost:19092",
        "auto.offset.reset": "earliest",
        "topics": ["my_topic"]
      }
    },
    "format": {
      "name": "avro",
      "config": {
        "schema": "{\"type\":\"record\",\"name\":\"ExampleSchema\",\"fields\":[{\"name\":\"id\",\"type\":\"int\"},{\"name\":\"ts\",\"type\":[\"null\",{\"type\":\"long\",\"logicalType\":\"timestamp-micros\"}]}]}",
        "skip_schema_id": true,
        "update_format": "raw"
      }
    }
}]');
```

> **Example 2**: Configure Avro parser to ingest data change events from Debezium

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Configure the Avro parser to ingest data change events from Debezium
```

  (refer to [Debezium connector documentation](/docs/connectors/sources/debezium-postgres.md) for additional details
  on setting up the Debezium source connector).

```sql
CREATE TABLE my_table (
    id INT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
    ts TIMESTAMP
) with (
  'connectors' = '[{
    "transport": {
      "name": "kafka_input",
      "config": {
        "bootstrap.servers": "localhost:19092,
        "auto.offset.reset": "earliest",
        "topics": ["my_topic"]
      }
    },
    "format": {
      "name": "avro",
      "config": {
        "registry_urls": ["http://localhost:18081"],
        "update_format": "debezium"
      }
    }
}]');
```

## Avro output

### Schema management

The Avro encoder generates an Avro schema, which the consumer can use to decode messages produced
by the encoder. For message formats that include key and value components with different schemas,
e.g., the Confluent JDBC connector format, the encoder generates both key and value schemas.

> If the connector configuration specifies a schema registry, the encoder publishes both

Reviewer: maybe add link to the relevant example

key and value schemas in the registry.

> The encoder supports an alternative workflow where users provide the schema as a JSON string

Reviewer: another link to example

| `registry_urls`               | array of strings| `[]` | List of schema registry URLs. When non-empty, the connector retrieves Avro message schemas from the registry.|
| `registry_proxy`              | string          | | Proxy that will be used to access the schema registry. Requires `registry_urls` to be set.|
| `registry_timeout_secs`       | string          | | Timeout in seconds used to connect to the registry. Requires `registry_urls` to be set.|
| `registry_username`           | string          | | Username used to authenticate with the registry.Requires `registry_urls` to be set. This option is mutually exclusive with token-based authentication (see `registry_authorization_token`).|
| `registry_password`           | string          | | Password used to authenticate with the registry. Requires `registry_urls` to be set.|
| `registry_authorization_token`| string          | | Token used to authenticate with the registry. Requires `registry_urls` to be set. This option is mutually exclusive with password-based authentication (see `registry_username` and `registry_password`).|

### Examples

> **Example 1**: Configure Avro encoder to send raw Avro records using a static user-provided schema.  The configuration does not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Configure the Avro encoder to send raw Avro records using a static user-provided schema.  The configuration does not
```

specify a schema registry URL, so the encoder will not try to publush the schema.

```sql
CREATE VIEW my_view
WITH (
  'connectors' = '[{
    "transport": {
      "name": "kafka_output",
      "config": {
        "bootstrap.servers": "localhost:19092",
        "topic": "my_topic",
        "auto.offset.reset": "earliest"
      }
    },
    "format": {
      "name": "avro",
      "config": {
        "schema": "{\"type\":\"record\",\"name\":\"ExampleSchema\",\"fields\":[{\"name\":\"id\",\"type\":\"int\"},{\"name\":\"ts\",\"type\":[\"null\",{\"type\":\"long\",\"logicalType\":\"timestamp-micros\"}]}]}"
      }
    }
  }]'
)
AS
    SELECT * from my_table;
```

> **Example 2**: Configure Avro encoder to output changes in the format expected by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Configure the Avro encoder to output changes in the format expected by the
```
